[MUSIC]
Welcome to the Haskell Weekly podcast.
This show is about Haskell,
a purely functional programming language.
I'm your guest Cameron Gera.
I'm an engineer here at ITProTV.
And with me today is
your host Taylor Fausak.
He's the lead engineer here at ITPro.
Thanks for joining me, Taylor.
>> Thanks for having me, Cam.
It's good to be back.
>> How you doing?
Yeah, right.
I always loved being in here.
It's always fun.
They have this really scary
picture behind where Taylor sits.
It's quite intimidating.
>> Too bad we can't pick it up on audio.
Yeah, I can't remember I don't.
What's its name again?
>> I don't know.
I thought you would know.
Well,
any who we're here to talk about Haskell,
not that guy in the picture.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Which we'll get to that later, maybe.
But today I had some questions
about parsing in Haskell.
I know Haskell's really powerful for that.
I was reading an article that
a guy just kinda put out about
kind of a regex cheat sheet.
So I know regex is pretty popular for
parsing, and
there's a lot of power behind it,
but it can get confusing and hazy.
This guy was nice enough to make a cheat
sheet for it, which is really cool.
But what good is regex compared to maybe
some of the other stuff in Haskell?
I've heard some things like parsing
combinators and stuff like that.
What's the difference?
>> So the world for
parsing in Haskell is vast.
We could fill way more than
15 minutes talking about it.
However, you mentioned regular
expressions and parser combinators,
which are two things I
think we can focus in on.
And Haskell has these really
powerful utilities for parsing and
that makes it an excellent language for
prototyping other languages in.
A lot of languages have their first
implementation written in Haskell or
a similar language like OCaml,
or something like that.
Before they transfer over
to a quote unquote real
implementation written in C or
C++ or Rust.
And the reason for that is that there
are so many tools in Haskell for
writing powerful parsers that turn
text into something useful that
you can then do something with.
Not everybody implements
programming languages.
In fact, very few people do.
So why is parsing so useful?
Why is Haskell so good at it?
One answer to that is that
parsing comes up everywhere.
We were talking over lunch about parsing.
And we started rattling off all the places
in our application that use it,
and it's basically everywhere.
An HTTP call uses parsing,
dealing with JSON uses parsing,
talking to the database uses parsing.
Parsing some bespoke game replay
file format, that's parsing too.
It's everywhere, you can't escape it.
>> Yeah, and we don't even necessarily see
it, because of kind of the things that
Haskell has already built and all these
packages that are already built that
handle all this parsing behind
the scenes that are just done.
But my curiosity is kind of,
what's under that?
Like, obviously they've built
their parsing with something.
What did they build it with?
>> That's a good question.
Just to back up for one second.
Parsing, it is everywhere and
it is hidden from us.
And that's not just in Haskell,
that's in JavaScript too, in Ruby, C,
every language,
there'll be a parser under the covers and
they will expose some interface
that is a lot nicer to work with.
So like with JSON,
>> Hopefully,
it's an appropriate interface,
just saying.
>> [LAUGH] Yeah.
>> Under the sheets, you never know what
could be under there, it could be bad.
But we're gonna move on.
>> We are, moving right along.
For something like JSON, it'd expose an
interface where you'd deal with objects,
and arrays, and numbers, and
strings rather than parsed tokens like
a curly bracket and a comma and a quote.
So Haskell's really good at
providing those things, but
it's not the only language
that can do that.
>> Hm, and so-
>> And I'm sorry, I forgot your question.
>> It's okay,
that was a little more intense than.
My question was a little more
intense than we wanted to go.
But I'd like to touch on the JSON,
or the JavaScript side a little bit,
being more background in JavaScript,
becoming more 50/50 now Haskell or
JavaScript as far as
knowledge is concerned.
In JavaScript, we use regex
a lot to parse, and match, and
see if something's what
we expect it to be.
>> Yeah, like on a credit card form.
>> Right, and like validation,
all that kind of stuff.
Kind of make sure it's all numbers or
whatever.
And we tend to just use regex,
cuz the library's pretty easy to use.
It's very well resourced, there's
a lot of stuff out there for regex,
they're everywhere.
>> It confuses the crap out of me still,
and
I have to reference it from time to time.
But it is still, there's a lot
out there and I know Haskell,
we can use regex in Haskell for
parsing, and it can do that.
But it's probably a little bit better
at just kinda the simple stuff, right.
Whereas maybe something like,
like a programming language there's
a little more intensive, right.
There's a little more parsing involved and
a little bit more robustness,
I would say that we need to have,
besides just what regex provides.
>> Yeah, when you look at the spectrum
of things that you can parse,
on the one hand you have something really
simple, like a credit card number,
which, let's say for
the sake of the argument, is 16 digits.
That's pretty easy to write
a regular expression for.
Most people would probably
understand what that means.
But if you wanted to write a regular
expression that parses, say,
a Python program, that's not gonna work.
You're not gonna be able to do it or
if you can,
it's gonna be some giant monstrosity
that nobody wants to look at.
>> Hey, but regex is strong enough,
it can do it, okay?
>> [LAUGH] If it sets its mind to it,
it might be able to.
You were talking about, maybe,
more powerful abstractions we could use
to parse something that's a little
richer than a credit card number.
>> Right.
>> And in Haskell, the thing that
we reach for is parser combinators.
It's not the only thing that'll do this,
but
it's the one that I think we're most
interested in talking about today.
>> That's the one I heard recently and
I would like to talk more about for sure.
Cuz it's definitely pretty interesting.
The idea of a combinator in my
mind sounds like something that we
would be combining these little
functions or something together.
>> Exactly that kind of do this action and
say, hey, I'll take this kind of file or
this kind of text, and
I can give you out this kind of result.
>> Mm-hm, that's a great
explanation of what combinator is.
And when you plug it together
with something like parser and
you end up with parser combinator,
what that means is that you can take
small parsers that are all
pretty simple by themselves.
Let's say you have a parser that parses
a string of numbers and another one that
parses a comma and another one that
parses a bunch of white space.
You could combine all of those
using parser combinators to come up
with an expression that
says something like,
parse a number followed by a comma
followed by another number.
Or parse any number of numbers,
each separated by a comma.
Those types of expressions are really
easy to do with parser combinators, but
surprisingly difficult to do
with regular expressions.
>> Mm-hm.
>> Usually in a language like JavaScript,
you will use regular expressions as
part of otherwise imperative code
that parses some stream.
So you're like, chew up, you know, a bunch
of digits and then change your parser
state to say, okay, now I'm looking for
a comma, and then you go look for a comma.
And then you switch back into
the I'm looking for a numbers thing.
Whereas in a language like
Haskell with parser combinators,
you can express that more declaratively
and say, I want a bunch of numbers.
And then a comma, and then some more
numbers and it reads very well.
>> That's really neat,
that's nice that it gives us that ability.
So we want to parse some
big weather data for fun.
Let's see what some weather trends are and
let's write a little app for it.
And we would be able to take whatever
weather format data it is and
if we have these simple little
parsers that parse each little piece,
we can kind of combine those all
together just to make it all work.
And there's type safety, right?
That's also a big nicety with regex,
you could mess up a regex expression and
never really realize that, right?
>> Yeah.
>> That's something that's dangerous.
Because that could end up
in production easy if you
just forget to test this one case,
and then you have some sort of leak or
something that somebody could
input an invalid credit card.
And they're not having access
to your service, or whatever
>> Or they get it for free or something.
Yeah, regex are pretty, or
maybe even surprisingly easy to mess up.
You miss one closing parenthesis,
and your whole regex crashes.
Or you put a dot in the wrong place and
it means something drastically different.
You obviously still can screw
things up with parser combinators.
>> Right, but
you can screw up anything with anything.
>> Right, if you try anything
you can screw anything up.
But it's gonna be harder with parser
combinators because you are still working
in the hosts language in Haskell, you're
just writing Haskell code calling Haskell
functions works the same
as everything else.
You can code review it without having
to look over to your cheat sheet and
figure out what the heck that
new rejects feature is mean.
What that means, whereas regex is this own
very compact little language that sits
inside of another language like
JavaScript or Ruby or what have you.
And so that makes it really powerful
because you can apply all the same tooling
that you do for static analysis or
just your gut feel for
that code looks right in that
code doesn't look right.
You can apply that to code written
with parser combinators versus stuff
wouldn't written with regular expressions.
>> No, that makes sense and
I was I don't like this guys cheat cheats.
Pretty cool as far as like just
little bits of Haskell regex,
a little shortcuts and things that.
But it just doesn't seem
like it's all that robust.
And obviously, it's hard when it's a
tutorial to really go deep into maybe some
of the powerful sides of regex, but
I just I just see it getting confusing.
If we were trying to go any
further than the simple examples.
>> Yeah, it can get confusing really fast.
And as someone who's spent a lot of my
career working with regular expressions.
I can say that they feel really good
to write because you think like, I'm so
clever and I got this really complicated
expression down to this really small
expression of it.
But then, six months later when
you come to look at it you think,
I don't know what this means anymore.
>> I hope it researched and
figured out which is which is where and
there's obviously rejects.
>> It's useful, it's got a purpose.
There's plenty of people
out there using it.
>> Yeah.
[INAUDIBLE] is cool.
>> And earlier you mentioned something
about type safety which I wanted to come
back to because Haskell is a strongly
typed language, not every language is.
But even aside from that, when you parse
something with regular expressions,
the only thing you can get out of it,
use strings, you match strings and
you get them out as groups of strings.
And then you have to do something
else with that group of strings.
So in a language like JavaScript, if you
wanted to pull a number out of a CSV file,
you could do that with the regex.
But then, once you have the number,
it's actually a string, so
you have to convert it into
a number via some other means.
In Haskell,
when you're using parser combinators,
you can have a parser combinator that
produces something other than a string.
In fact almost all of them produce
things other than strings.
They'll produce a number directly or
even a custom data type.
So if you have like a user in your system
and you wanna write it out to some custom,
serialized format and then read that back.
You can write a parser that will
read it directly into a user,
there's no intermediate step involved.
>> Right, which that's nice and
that guarantees that you're
gonna get the tech you expect.
>> Exactly, there's no chance-
>> And
the compiler will also tell you that.
>> There's no chance in
between parsing the thing and
turning it into the value
that you actually want.
For anything to go wrong cuz
they happen at the same time.
>> Right, that's really neat I
think that value in itself is
obviously a testament to
the strongly typed Haskell language.
And I think that leans more towards this
parser combinator idea rather than regex,
even in Haskell because
regex deals with strings.
That's its nature.
Yeah.
>> I will say indefensive regexes.
One thing they do very well that pressure
combinators aren't necessarily as good at
is substituting something
in a string of text.
So if you have some big run and
you want to replace every letter t with
the letter g, For whatever reason.
>> Maybe you're doing DNA sequencing and
you're doing some weird stuff.
I don't know.
>> Maybe YG.
>> Something like that.
>> Whatever it is.
>> Doing that replacement is super
easy with regular expressions
because you can match on something and
then take an action based on that match.
Granted, this isn't a feature of
regular expressions themselves,
like computer science concept.
But in every language that has regular
expressions, there's a mechanism for
doing these substitutions, right?
Which is helpful and with JavaScript like
It's one of the best ways to be able to,
somewhat safely, guaranteed substitution.
If you're looking through this
set of data, and you say,
hey, every time you see this word I
want you to replace is with this word,
that substitute function is useful for
that.
>> It's so easy to use.
>> Right, and
that's the great thing about regex,
and I don't I think it's really good for
the little stuff but it's just really cool
that Haskell offers us the parser
combinator that allow us to get a little.
A little, more intense,
without losing understanding and
also some type safety like that's I
that is important to writing good robust
code that doesn't break every other week.
It's only about finding a bug.
This forum is validating
right anymore which
I mean I doubt we would use pressure
commentators on a form validation because.
>> But you, right.
>> Yeah, there's no reason not to.
Yeah, swear.
So I know we're kind of running out
on time maybe but
I just kind of wanted to.
Have more of a curiosity,
is there much overhead with
understanding parser combinators?
If you have a good level
understanding of Haskell,
what's the level of difficulty
of parser combinators?
>> Parser combinators
definitely don't come for free.
It's not like if you
already understand Haskell,
you can jump right into a parser and
work it out just fine.
You'll probably be able to stumble around
and figure stuff out and go look at
documentation or read something, but it
won't necessarily be immediately obvious.
That being said, as I said earlier, you
can still lean on your ASCII knowledge,
you can look at something and say that's
a function call, that's an operator.
That's taken this argument or
that argument,
and you can kind of piece it together.
Many of the parser libraries for Haskell
share a lot of common kind of vocabulary.
They use the same words for stuff which
makes it really easy to jump between them.
So if you use parser and
one of your libraries and
you use mega parts like in the other or
there's a bunch cool.
You'll be able to jump between
those without too much trouble.
So your knowledge is
transferable between them.
There's still the downside of as you
mentioned at the top of the show.
Regex is are everywhere, every
language basically has them everybody.
Most working programmers
know what they mean and
parser commentators
are not like that at all.
They're their own little thing.
>> Right.
So
there's a little bit of
mental complexity there but.
>> Mm-hm.
>> The payoff of safety and.
>> I think it's worth it.
>> Right, it's worth it in the end.
I mean that's kind of how a lot
of things are, I mean ours was.
Great, but
there are some confusing aspects.
Conduits and lenses,
all these different topics,
and parser combinators
are probably in that list.
>> Yeah, it's actually, in my mind,
very similar to lenses,
in that it's a very powerful abstraction
that gives you something that's
hard to get In other languages, and
it does it in an expressive way that
looks kind of impenetrable at first..
But then as you come to understand it,
you realize, no, this actually makes a lot
of sense, it's just weirder,
it's just different than what I'm used to.
And with lenses and
parser combinators both, they have
ties into other parts of Haskell.
So as you understand them better, you sort
of get a different of deeper understanding
of other parts that you've used before,
that you now see in a different light.
So with parser combinators, they
frequently use this weird operator that's
like an asterisk and then a greater
than sign or the other way around.
And you can view this in a parser as,
do this, but throw away the result and
then do this other thing.
And it turns out that that's super useful
and it shows up in lots of other places in
Haskell anything like that's the same
concept that I was using over here for
parsers is applicable over here
where I'm running servers.
And it's just kind of strange to see that
same thing in these two
wildly different places.
>> That's really cool and
I think really that's been a great
conversation on parsing and Haskell.
Some of the differences between,
the regex and
parser combinators and
some of the more verbosity.
I don't know if that's the right word.
>> I think verbosity's a word.
>> I keep trying to use these fancy
words and probably just shouldn't.
I should just let it be.
But bottom line is it's powerful, right?
It gives us.
>> It is.
Haskell is great for parsing.
It is a language that a lot of people
use to parse, and that's really cool.
>> I've never had just time, hey, let me
write this parser for this random thing.
But I know another one of co-workers here,
Justin.
He was writing a parser in Rust.
And he asked me questions cuz he
doesn't deal with the functional
paradigm that much.
But he was kinda like,
what is going on here?
And I'm like,
I can kind of see what's going on.
Like obviously just from the knowledge,
you're like the functional
programming paradigm.
>> Yeah.
>> And so I think that's just cool
that Haskell is more commonly
the one you choose to write partner and
just a prototype that parser.
Just because it's quick and
it works the way you expect it to work and
there's type safety.
So it's a great language for you.
>> Yeah.
>> I think it's awesome.
>> Yeah, it's awesome.
>> Thanks for
talking to me about pursing
in Haskell this week Cameron
>> No, thank you for having me too.
It's been a lot of fun.
It was really cool to hear your
background and your knowledge and
understanding of parsing the Haskell
>> I
hope I've helped you understand
parsing in Haskell a little better and
I hope I've helped our listeners
understand parsing and
how it compares with regular expressions
other languages like JavaScript.
>> Yeah, I'm excited about
topics to come to I think
our listeners got some cool stuff coming.
>> Thank you for
listening to the Haskell Weekly podcast.
This has been episode seven.
If you liked our show, find out more
at our website, haskellweekly.news.
Thanks again for listening.
I've been your host Taylor Fausak.
See you again next week.
Adios.
[MUSIC]